Theory: Input & Output, Success & Fail (#8)
apisyouwonthate/book-build-apis-2: 1-theory/3-input-and-output.adoc

= Input and Output

Most of the whole idea of an API is "input" and "output", and in HTTP an input
comes in the form of "requests", and output comes in the form of "responses".

> There's a "method" involved, and a URL (Universal Resource Location) also known as an "endpoint".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a "method" involved, and a URL (Uniform Resource Locator) also known as an "endpoint".
```

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL

format, and send it on its way.

There are a bunch of HTTP methods you might run into:

- GET
- POST
- PUT
- PATCH
- DELETE
- HEAD
- OPTIONS
- TRACE

Some of these methods might look familiar from your favourite web application frameworks routing layer.

Some frameworks like Rails push their super magical routing to abstract away from manually declaring these routes, so if you are a Rails developer who is unfamiliar with these routes, try typing `rails routes` to see what shows up.

There are a more HTTP methods floating around, but the idea is that they all have very specific defined behavior. Lazy people can pick the wrong method and misuse it, which cocks up a lot of various HTTP tools, but theoretically if used properly tools will know what to do in a lot of scenarios you might not have thought of.

For example, many tools will know that they can cache a GET request, but cannot cache a POST. They will know they can retry a PUT or a DELETE, but better not retry a PATCH.

Let's take a quick peruse through the HTTP methods.

=== GET

Just fetch some stuff. Don't trigger any destructive changes anywhere else as result. This should be repeatable.

=== POST

> Often used purely for "creates" but can be used for any non-idempotent action. Idempotent means you can do this thing over and over again, and it happening two or more times won't create different outcomes.

Author: Done!

=== PUT

This is a very handy for supplying the entirety of

Once a request is made by the API client, your server will attempt to produce a response.

== Responses

Much the same as an HTTP request, your HTTP response is going to end up as plain
text (unless you're using SSL, but hang on, we aren't there yet).

.Example HTTP response containing a JSON body
[source,http]
----
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Server: nginx
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "id":"1690",
  "is_gift":true,
  "user":{
    "id":1,
    "name":"Theron Weissnat",
    "bio":"Occaecati excepturi magni odio distinctio dolores.",
    "gender":"female",
    "picture_url":"https://cdn.example.org/foo.png",
    "timezone":-1,
    "birthday":"1989-09-17 16:27:36",
    "status":"available",
    "created_at":"2013-11-22 16:37:57",
    "redeem_by":"2013-12-22 16:37:57"
  }
}
----

We can spot some fairly obvious things here. `200 OK` is a standard
no-issues-here-buddy response. We have a `Content-Type` again, and the API is

> pointing out that caching this is not ok.

Author: Removed, old copy and paste mismatch. Thanks!
